Working on a getting started tutorial #1646 (#1683)
mercedes-benz/sechub: sechub-doc/src/docs/asciidoc/sechub-getting-started.adoc

// SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT

include::documents/gen/server-version.adoc[]

include::documents/config.adoc[]

= image:sechub-logo.png[sechub] SecHub Getting Started Guide

include::documents/shared/about_sechub.adoc[]

include::documents/shared/about_documentation_all.adoc[]

//--

== Introduction
This tutorial is going to teach you how to locally run the SecHub server and the PDS (Product Delegation Server) server for GoSec. + 
After that, you are going to learn how to scan apps written in 'go' for vulnerabilities. +
And optionally, install and work with the SecHub extension for VSCodium.

plantuml::diagrams/diagram_behind_the_scenes_sechub.plantuml[format=svg, title=Setup Overview] +
This Diagram roughly explains how Sechub functions, behind the scenes.
[WARNING]
--
This tutorial is tested and intended for Debian/Ubuntu! +
Although it should also work on different Linux distributions.
--

=== Prerequisites

You are going to need: 

> * docker for https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/debian/[Debian] / https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/ubuntu/[Ubuntu]

Reviewer: Actually, only the Docker engine needs to be installed. One can should be able to install it on any Linux distributions.

Furthermore, what Docker version is needed to run this example? Please specify the version.

```suggestion
* docker (e. g. https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/debian/[Debian],  / https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/ubuntu/[Ubuntu])
```

> * docker compose

Reviewer: Is Docker compose already included in the new Docker?

Author: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/29148934/220914946-18de4485-f073-40a1-9fa4-c750e4a730e1.png)
[Source](https://docs.docker.com/compose/compose-v2/)

* git
* And possibly jq

Optional:

> * VSCodium

Reviewer: Please include a link

* https://open-vsx.org/extension/mercedes-benz/sechub[SecHub Extension] for VSCodium

=== Instructions

==== Clone the repository

In your terminal type:

[source, shell]
--

> 

Reviewer: All those snippets should be included via file. At the end write one wrapper script which calls all the snippetes:

For example, this scripts is:

clone-sechub.sh

other scripts will be:

start.sh
…
etc.

the wrapper script will then call all scripts one after each otther:

run-all-steps.sh
~~~
./clone-sechub.sh
./start.sh
…
~~~

git clone https://github.com/mercedes-benz/sechub.git
cd sechub

--
This makes a local copy of the SecHub project on your computer and goes to the project's folder

==== Start SecHub Server

> The Sechub Server is responsible for taking jobs and passing them to the PDS server for processing, also it returns and processes the results from the PDS server. +

Reviewer: You could visualize that process using a sequence diagram or another diagram type.

Author: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/29148934/220928732-5909303c-252a-4620-9edb-f5149ccba1b2.png)
I think this graph above already does it?

Reviewer: Yes, perfect.

> The Sechub Server is responsible for taking jobs and passing them to the PDS server for processing, also it returns and processes the results from the PDS server. +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Sechub server is responsible for taking jobs and passing them to the PDS server for processing. Once the job finishes on the PDS side, the fetched and processed by SecHub. +
```

[source, shell]
--
./sechub-solution/01-start-single-docker-compose.sh
--

This starts the server.

==== Start GoSec+PDS Server

> The PDS server, which contains a GoSec instance, will check the actual code for vulnerabilities and output a result of them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The PDS server, which contains the security tool GoSec, will check the actual code for vulnerabilities and output a result of them.
```

[source, shell]
--

> ./sechub-pds-solutions/gosec/05-start-single-sechub-network-docker-compose.sh

Reviewer: Explain a bit what this script is doing.

--

==== Setup Project

> After starting all servers, some environment variables have to be set. Specifically `SECHUB_SERVER`, `SECHUB_USERID`, `SECHUB_APITOKEN`, `SECHUB_TRUSTALL` and alsoSecHub's CLI tools have to be added to the `PATH` variable to be able to do scans.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After starting all servers, some environment variables have to be set. Specifically `SECHUB_SERVER`, `SECHUB_USERID`, `SECHUB_APITOKEN`, `SECHUB_TRUSTALL` and SecHub's CLI tools have to be added to the `PATH` variable to be able to do scans.
```

> Here we set them to local credentials because everything is hosted locally:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we set the local credentials because everything is hosted locally:
```

[source, shell]
--
export SECHUB_SERVER=https://localhost:8443
export SECHUB_USERID=admin
export SECHUB_APITOKEN='myTop$ecret!'
export SECHUB_TRUSTALL=true
export PATH="$PATH:`pwd`/sechub-cli/build/go/platform/linux-amd64:`pwd`/sechub-developertools/scripts"
--

After setting the variables, you can run this script, which will first check if you have set the variable correctly. Then it will create a project, and create a user who will be assigned to the project. (Created user/project can be changed in the 8000-setup-gosec.sh file)

[source, shell]
--
./sechub-solution/setup-pds-scripts/8000-setup-gosec.sh
--

> After running it, you should get similar output if everything is working correctly:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After running it, you should get a similar output if everything is working correctly:
```

            "key": "pds.productexecutor.timetowait.nextcheck.milliseconds",
            "value": "500"
          },
          {
            "key": "pds.productexecutor.trustall.certificates",
            "value": "true"
          }
        ]
      },
      "executorVersion": 1,
      "enabled": true,
      "uuid": "d23dc9ab-4a3d-4924-8d77-8026069cbd91"
    }
  ],
  "projectIds": []
}
Created executor and profile
project: test-gosec
profile: pds-gosec
Assigned profile pds-gosec to project test-gosec

Setup of GoSec complete:

- user: gosec
- project: test-gosec
--

Now you are ready to do scans!

==== Scanning

Now you can go to another project's directory and do a scan for vulnerabilities.
In this example, we will use sechub's folder, but you are free to use any other project!

Before starting the scan, you need a `sechub.json`, which tells which files to be scanned, and which to be skipped.

Here's a bare-bones example:

[source, shell]
--
echo "
{
  "apiVersion": "1.0",
  "codeScan": {
    "fileSystem": {
      "folders": [
        "."
      ]
    },
    "excludes": []
  }
}
" > sechub.json
--

But you can skip this step, because the sechub's folder, already contains it.

> And to scan it, just type `sechub -project test-gosec scan`, this will create a JSON file, which contains the output of the scan. If you want HTML output just add `-reportformat html` as an option: `sechub -project test-gosec -reportformat html scan`

Reviewer: this will create a JSON file -> this is the SecHub report with findings.

> ==== Install Sechub's VsCode Plugin (OPTIONAL)

Reviewer: Please use VSCodium for this example and not VSCode.

> Sechub's VsCode Plugin helps you better visualize where the vulnerabilities in your code are located!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sechub's VsCode Plugin helps you better visualize where the vulnerabilities in your code are located.
```

==== Setup Project

After starting all servers, some environment variables have to be set. Specifically `SECHUB_SERVER`, `SECHUB_USERID`, `SECHUB_APITOKEN`, `SECHUB_TRUSTALL` and SecHub's CLI tools have to be added to the `PATH` variable to be able to do scans.

> Here we set to local credentials because everything is hosted locally:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we set local credentials because everything is hosted locally:
```
